So now it's time to
turn our attention
to our last great
example, and this will be
the ImageStreamGang case study.
And we're going to focus on
the parallel implementation
of ImageStreamGang.
There will also
be other variants
we'll talk about later that
involve completable futures.
So in this part
of the lesson, I'm
going to talk
about the structure
and the functionality of
the ImageStreamGang app,
which as I mentioned,
is this framework
of apps, a framework of
behaviors and strategies
that illustrate various
parallelism and asynchrony
mechanisms in Java.
It applies a couple of
different frameworks.
It applies the parallel
streams framework.
It also applies the
completable futures framework,
and it uses the
fork join framework.
So as I'm sure you
recall, the parallel
streams model uses
fork join, and also,
the completable futures
model may use fork join.
It doesn't have to.
Parallel streams has
to use fork join,
whereas completable futures--
it's kind of an optional thing.
And we'll talk more
about completable futures
in a few weeks.
The focus here is on integrating
object-oriented and functional
programming.
It's been my experience
that both of these paradigms
work well in isolation,
but they work really
well when you combine them.
And that's because they
have different purposes,
different charters, if you
will, and when you combine them,
you get the best of
both worlds, sort of
like a like a Reese's
peanut butter cup.
You get peanut
butter and chocolat.
They taste really good
when you put them together,
or at least I think so.
I recently found some people
who didn't like Reese's peanut
butter cups.
I was very surprised.
We'll also talk here
about how patterns
are used to emphasize key
roles and responsibilities
in the design of
the app, as well
as the design of the underlying
parallelism frameworks.
One thing to note is that many
of the classes and frameworks
in Java are heavily, heavily
influenced by patterns--
gang of four patterns,
post patterns.
You name it, you'll
probably find
examples of most of the core
patterns in these classic works
on patterns in the
Java class library.
So let's start by describing
the pattern-oriented
ImageStreamGang app.
The purpose of this app is to
combine streams and completable
futures with a framework
called the StreamGang framework
in order to be
able to efficiently
and scalably and simply
download, transform, store,
and display images.
So here's kind of
what it how it works.
There's a couple
different variants.
I'll talk about the variant here
that's the Android app version.
There's also a
command-line version
if you don't like Android
or you don't have Android.
So what it does is, it prompts
the user for a list of URLs
to download through a dialog.
You give it the user.
The user gives it
the list of URLs
it wants to have
downloaded, or he or she
wants to have downloaded.
And then it goes
ahead and downloads
those images via
one or more threads.
In the case of the parallel
streams version, of course,
one or more threads in the
Java common ForkJoinPool.
It then goes ahead and
applies a bunch of filters
to transform the
downloaded images.
These filters are not the
filter intermediate operation
in the streams framework,
but instead, they're
image filters that
transform the images.
So we might go from,
say, colored images
to grayscale images,
or whatever you
want to use as your transform.
These filtered images are then
output to persistent storage,
to files on the device,
so that they can then
go ahead and be displayed.
This particular app
applies a whole range
of modern Java features.
I highly recommend you
get a copy of the Modern
Java in Action book.
The precursor to this
was Java 8 in Action.
That's really where I
learned all this stuff
several years ago.
I recommend you get this book.
It's a wonderful book.
You'll learn a lot
of things from it.
So we demonstrate the use
of sequential and parallel
streams, which we're
going to cover now.
In a couple weeks, we're
going to come back and cover
CompletableFutures,
which interesting enough,
you can see here are
guided by the structure
of sequential streams.
And of course, we also use
our foundational Java features
we covered in other courses,
like lambda expressions
and method references.
So this is a really
cool tour de force
of all the different
things we're
covering in the different
classes in our program,
and it kind of pulls it
all together, hopefully.
It's much better,
in my mind, to write
code that looks like this,
which uses lambda expressions
and method references, rather
than to write hideous code,
like this, that uses Java
anonymous inner classes, which
are just so full of
extraneous syntax,
it makes your mind ache.
What I'd like to do now is
start talking about some
of the patterns that are applied
in the ImageStreamGang app.
There's a wide
range of patterns.
I'm going to cover the key ones.
There's a bunch of
other ones, as well,
but we'll cover the core ones.
Some of these patterns
are so-called Gang
of Four patterns from the
Design Patterns Catalog.
Other patterns are
so-called POSA patterns
from the Pattern-Oriented
Software Architecture
series of books, of which
I'm a co-author on several.
And these patterns
are all applied
to help enhance the
framework-based architecture
of this app, and also
of the underlying Java
parallelism frameworks, as well.
Some of the patterns are
essential to the design
of the software.
For example, the use of
streams implies the fact
that we're using the
pipes and filters pattern.
You'll recall we talked
about the pipes and filters
pattern quite a while
back, a number of weeks
ago, when we first
discussed what a stream was.
And I talked about how the
pipes and filters pattern, which
came from the POSA 1 book, and
then also reappears in the POSA
4 book, divides an
application's tasks
into several self-contained
data processing steps,
and then connects
these steps together
via intermediate data buffers
to provide a data processing
pipeline.
And this is a very powerful,
very common pattern.
Shows up all over the place,
as we talked about before.
Another pattern, which occurs
in the Describing POSA 4 book
and also described a
bit in the POSA 2 book,
is the future pattern,
which provides a proxy
to a client when it
invokes a service,
and it's used to keep track
of the state of the service's
concurrent computation.
And the future only can be
used to get a value back
by the client when the
computation completes.
So typically what
happens is you invoke
an asynchronous operation.
You get back a future.
Then the operation
runs asynchronously,
and when the
operation's complete,
the future becomes triggered and
you can get the result. This,
of course, is at the
very heart of a lot
of the asynchronous programming
that we do with Java,
with Java CompletableFutures
or Java Futures.
In our world for the
ImageStreamGang app,
this is used very heavily by
the CompletableFutures version
of this app, which
we'll talk about later.
There's also another fundamental
pattern called ResourcePool,
which appears in
the POSA 3 book,
and this prevents expensive
acquisition and release
of resources by
recycling them, and when
they're no longer
needed, they're
just put back in
the pool, rather
than having to be shut down
and recreated from scratch.
And obviously,
this is what's used
with something like
a ForkJoinPool,
or some other type
of thread pool
that comes from the
Executor framework,
or is developed in a custom
way by some user who implements
the ExecutorService interface.
So all the thread pooling
mechanisms we talk about
are basically the ResourcePool
pattern in the POSA 3 book.
Some other patterns that occur
from the Gang of Four book
would be things like
template method,
where you define the overall
structure of a method
and then allow subclasses
to refine or redefine
some steps in the method.
This is a very common pattern
used all over the place
in frameworks.
We use this stuff left, right,
and center in our StreamGang
framework.
Things like processStream(),
processInput()--
those are examples hook
methods that get called back,
and you can customize them and
fill them in to do different
things.
The Java class
libraries, of course,
are actually chock full
of template methods
all over the place,
and that's no surprise,
because it's a very fundamental
framework-based pattern.
Yet another method that
appears everywhere--
you've probably heard me
mention this over, and over,
and over again in this course--
is the concept of a factory
method pattern, which
encapsulates the concrete
details of object creation
inside a factory method, rather
than letting the clients create
the objects themselves,
thereby separating
object creation and
all of its messiness
from object use and all of
its subsequent simplicity.
This is another
classic pattern you
see that's used in things like
the various Collectors utility
class, the Executors
utility class.
You can see this using
the Collector interface.
There's just factory methods
galore throughout Java
and throughout our examples.
Another pattern we use in
the ImageStreamGang app
is something called
the decorator, which
allows a behavior to be
added to an individual object
dynamically without
affecting the behavior
of any other objects
from the same class.
And we use this for the image
filter processing hierarchy,
where we have decorators
that can come along and add
these image filters to an object
that knows how to store itself
on disk, an image that knows
how to store itself on disk
after it's been filtered
through its decorators.
So that's another cool example
of patterns that are applied.
There are also
other patterns that
are applied not quite
as profound, patterns
like the Singleton
pattern, that ensures
a class has only one instance
and provides a global access
point to it.
Ironically, Singleton, which is
a bit of a notorious pattern,
actually finds
many uses in Java,
at least in terms
of the behaviors.
So you can think of something
like the common ForkJoinPool
as effectively
being a Singleton,
where you've got one
instance of them.
and we use Singletons in other
places in our program, as well.
And then something else
that's worth noting,
which is a pattern that appears
in the POSA 1 book and the POSA
4 book, is called
command processor.
And this is used to package
a piece of application
functionality and
parameterize it into an object
so it can be usable in other
contexts, such as later
in time, or running
on a different thread,
or running in a
different process.
And this pattern gets used
in our ImageStreamGang app
for Android when we want to
pass certain information created
in the background to the
user interface thread
to be displayed.
And it gets used
other places, as well.
It's used in a number of
Java concurrency frameworks,
such as the ExecutorService.
So let's just give
a little summary
of how to understand
the ImageStreamGang app.
This app is complicated.
It contains a lot of classes.
But if we kind of break
it down and look at it
from different perspectives,
it becomes a little easier
to get your head around.
So the different
perspectives here
are its pattern-oriented
design, which is partially
what we covered
here; its data flows,
and we'll talk about
some of those things when
we look at how to
visualize its behavior;
as well as various detailed
code walkthroughs, which
will do a lot of.
So trying to look at this
from the right perspective
is really important.
I recommend you watch
this entire set of lessons
carefully to understand
how everything works.
It might or might not make
sense the first time you see it,
but the more you watch it and
the more you look at the code,
the better you'll feel about it.
We'll be showing a
bunch of visualizations
using parallel streams to
demonstrate how things work.
I really like this nomenclature
because I think it gives you
a high level, bird's-eye
view of what's going on.
And of course, the
ground truth in anything
is to look at the source
code, which is available here
in the ImageStreamGang folder
in my GitHub repository.